it is my uh honor and privilege today to
introduce our next three speakers uh
including our next speaker uh who is
Casey ree uh Casey is an artist and
educator based in Los Angeles and he
works through the Contemporary lens of
software spanning small works on paper
and urban scale installations in 2001 he
co-founded processing and open- Source
programming language and environment for
the visual arts which um has probably
inspired many of you uh in the room I
know it has been a big part of uh my
career and learning to code and learning
to be an artist and designer um he also
is the co-creator of feral file uh which
is an online platform for exhibiting uh
and collecting Digital Arts uh Reese is
also a professor of design and media
arts at uh UCLA where he is also the
co-director of social software uh an
initiative FOC focused on examining the
social impacts and possibilities of
making with software please give a warm
welcome to
Casey thanks Barry thanks Kate it's I'm
really so excited that Kate's
here I've been doing things on and off
with gray area uh for a really long time
and it's really um not as much as I
would like it's really always wonderful
to be here and I'm really glad to be
here this morning with you it's good to
look around the room and see people that
I've known for like like 25 years people
I've seen for a few years um I'm excited
to present this uh short presentation
with you uh confabulation around
software and
art here is a question we've all seen
this question so many times can art be
created with computers I think I feel
this is an absurd question but you know
over the last 25 years that I've been
working in this field uh the question
just hasn't gone away it gets asked over
and over and over again year by
year so here here's another question um
Can art be created without computers
like what about this question is it
worse is it better um I like it better I
think it's equally absurd but it comes
from a different starting point um this
is the way that I work the way that I
think uh this question encourages me to
think about now this moment rather than
the past looking forward um you know
depending on how we count people have
been doing this kind of work for over 60
years um maybe we can start thinking
about it in a different way so if we're
making art with computers uh what's
interesting about this like really
what's the
point today I'm focusing on two topics
uh software art and distributing and
collecting software art these two things
together largely around uh the project
ferof file that I co-founded four years
ago here is a definition one definition
of software art from Christiana Paul's
digital art book which was first
published in 2003 it's now in its fourth
edition um the most recent was published
last year
the category of so-called software art
is another manifestation of blurry
terminology agree uh software is
generally defined as formal instructions
that can
be however every form of digital art
employ code and algorithms at some level
many of the previously mentioned
installations are based on custom
software even if their physical and
visual manifestations distract from the
underlying layer of data and code any
visual digital image from print to video
has ultimately been produced by
instructions and the software that was
used to create or manipulate it however
the term software art is usually applied
to projects that have been written from
scratch by artists so that's sort of one
one definition and a definition that
I'll be using
today if we zoom out and see where
Christiana situates software art within
her larger framework for digital art you
can see uh she has installations film
video and animation internet art from
web one to social media software art
virtual reality augmented and mixed
reality site specific in public art and
Sound and Music and one reason I love
the gray a festival so much is that
we're seeing all of these things you
know over the weekend this this whole
range of diverse exciting
media so I'm going to go back and time a
little bit um and talk more specifically
about software art in terms of like my
own path for a moment so this is a
photograph from 2003 uh 21 years ago
this is a set of my tissue prints along
the wall 40 prints um and the software
being shown at the bitforms gallery in
New York so the software is in that
custom Cabinet that you see in front of
the the wall display there so this is
how I was exhibiting software art in a
gallery back then 2003 on a CRT
television low resolution flickering
images um and I was working with printed
images a lot at the time because the
screens were so limited in their
resolution
uh a couple days ago I opened up my flat
file and I took this snapshot this is
one of the prints from that show think
the print still looks as it did then it
still looks like a print um but the
software work like going back to that
time it looks really ancient dated
antique old quaint um I think however
now we're like well over that threshold
that software is a more stable more
mature medium um this compromise working
across media I think no longer needs to
exist we can just be Allin in creating
software
um here's an installation of a related
work called path this is an installation
in 2016 a little over a decade after
that first image I think comparably
things moved quickly you know computers
became more capable quickly projectors
became higher resolution brighter more
accessible everything more
stable so now I'm going to get in a
little bit to the distribution of things
um distribution for of software art for
collectors and institutions had no
standards at that time um artists
develop their own documentation in their
own way this is where I ended up with my
documentation uh for much of the 2000s
you can see here a series of prints that
show how the software looks um the data
is on these two CDs two for redundancy
um there's signatures and it's all
stored in a small custom Ed metal box
here you can see the prints a little bit
better the idea being that when
eventually the software fails these
images can be used to restore the work
there's something to Benchmark against
uh my documentation packages are mostly
the same now um but the CDs have been
swapped out for SD
cards and I really learned the hard way
over the years that the most important
thing really the only important thing is
the source code so like when the work
goes to a collection or goes in an
institution the source code you know
printed on archival paper as best I can
uh goes in there as well as the the data
so operating systems
change um everything changes and so to
keep the work alive like all the
information needed to keep that work
alive as in the source code even though
I think the work is not the source code
it's the idea is the source code
embodies but that's maybe another thread
I could have gone down that I didn't
imagine until right now so we're going
to stick on stick on
topic um so going back to this when I
was showing work in the gallery you know
at this time later it was like an
addition of one one piece of software
going to one collector and this piece of
software was able to do everything it
could do you know every time it was was
opened it did something different and it
kept doing something different so the
work had a beginning but it never had an
end um it would always change uh you
know within its scope something happened
a few years ago is new ideas began to
emerge um and in this way uh one piece
of software could be fragmented into a
series into in a way like a unique
software Edition uh so this is work
similar to that work that we looked at
in the earlier images this is called
phototaxis um here
that one piece of software was kind a
way like subdivided into 1,000 different
unique Works um and each work in the
series is a piece of software it's a
complete work but it you know starts
with a given configuration and then
continues from there rather than having
one work that sort of contains
everything now that one work still
exists but it's been sort of addition
into a series of individual unique
pieces in a larger quantity which for me
importantly makes the work more
accessible allows the work to get out
um in a different
way so all of this work can be
registered on a blockchain as a unique
record the source code is there uh the
provenant of who have collected the work
is there and that documentation package
is still used but it's no longer needed
there's been this standard that's been
created and all the information is
public all the information is accessible
all right so that's a short journey into
how my way of working with software has
changed I want to go back a little bit
go back into this wider domain of where
we started this idea of digital art um
we're going to look at a few works from
my collection from around that time this
is from 2019 uh this is piece by
Theo so digital art on the web and net
art you know that's been going strong
since the 1990s this way of making
public work this way of releasing work
to a really wide audience um what I
think happened is the surge of
development of the blockchains over the
last decade really accelerated the way
that people collect digital media and
also the way that artists create I think
work no longer needs to be modified to
like fit in a brick-and-mortar gallery
digital work can stay digital and it can
still be collected I think that's the
shift that's really kind of been proven
out the Boom in the bust and now
something else over the last couple
years the work can be exhibited online
um anywhere with a network
connection as it has been but now I
think in a different
way so digital formats for music video
and text um can be distributed in a way
that's completely different from their
corresponding analog media you know
vinyl tapes and books and all these
media existed before digital computers
so I think the question I'm asking about
software art is like what are the forms
of digital art that have been explored
since we have ported these things from
analog to digital what kinds of work are
completely unique to digital media so in
2019 there were many places um online to
collect work of this form video image
but none had been at that point
developed to collect software work my
heart my passion my life is all in the
software work so I co-founded ferof file
in 2020 co-founded with a company called
bitmark um to make a place to exhibit
and collect software art it's a place
for artists who work with code to show
their work before 2020 I was very
excited to be collecting digital art
video and images but I was also I don't
know I'd say extremely frustrated for
like 20 years I've been trying to figure
out a way to distribute software art at
a at a wider scale than sort of the work
going to one collector or one
institution and at that time in 2020
nobody had really built this and so with
my um with my friends at bitmark we
decided to build ferof file and so we
started with a set of um Artistry and
collector rights and we built ferof file
around these ideas and commitments so my
eyes have kind of gone in the last
couple years I can't read my screen very
well um I think I have to turn around so
yeah so the set of artist rights are
that you own the copyright and image
rights as the artist you earn a
percentage of all the secondary sales
you will always be credited your work is
protected um you'll know when the work
changes hands and you grant certain
rights some of the rights um to a
collector to use display and resell your
work and that these rights are retained
forever so those are the artist rights
that we built around and these are the
collector rights The Collector can
download the work work can display the
work can be assured of the work's
authenticity um can loan or lease the
work can resell or transfer the work
that the collector can remain
anonymous and that the collector always
respects the artist rights and those
rights are retained forever so when you
collect a work from ferof file we have
this um human readable version and then
there's also sort of the the legal
version that is a part of that um uh
transaction as well so
we started working on ferof file in the
summer of 2020 and we launched the first
exhibition which was called social codes
in March of
2021 so first and foremost uh we created
ferof file to make new opportunities for
artists for the social codes exhibition
uh many of the artists hadn't exhibited
work in a curated exhibition before you
know these were artists who had been
sharing their work with with large
audiences on Tumblr Instagram Twitter
you know these are plac that aren't made
for really exhibiting work they aren't
made for collecting work and so we made
ferof file as a way to allow artists
working digitally
to um find an audience of people who are
interested in supporting their Studios
through collecting their
work so beyond software art uh ferof
file was also built to support other
kinds of digital work 3D models video
images and then the core idea of ferof
file was to invite curators who would
then invite the artists so some of my
own personal best experiences as an
artist were um curator Le exhibitions
and I really wanted to put that at the
foreground of ferof file and to make
that um opportunity available to more
artists working with digital media so at
the very start you know for the first
six months um I selected the curators
but then after that we had a series of
open calls and the exhibitions that have
um come after have largely been uh grown
out of that open
system so over the last few years we've
produced 44 exhibitions uh ranging from
large group exhibitions to solo shows um
and we've been lucky to work with a wide
scope of curators and artists uh We've
commissioned 32 curators um and over 200
artists to create original work for
ferof file for me that's something
that's also important about ferof file
is that artists are making new work and
we're getting new work out on the on the
through it through the gallery um this
is the unsupervised solo exhibition from
fenadol um this is the sound
exhibition's uh sound machines
exhibition from February of this year
curated by the Museum of Modern Art a
long collaboration with
them the Chain Reaction exhibition
created by Christiana
Paul the onscreen presence exhibition
created by Regina
haran featuring the work of Golan Lev
who is speaking later
today the wetwear exhibition created by
Mindy Sue
the invisible exhibition created by
Linda
dunia the material Wonderland created by
Alice scope and Barry
through the doppelganger exhibition
created by Chris
Coleman Chris a wave hi
Chris uh so with the time remaining the
few minutes remaining um I want to take
a deeper dive into three exhibitions of
software art that we created on ver file
so we'll start with crystalline work
John Gerard move into grey matter Arya
Harvey and then crawl by Travis
SMY so crystalline work opened this last
June so I'm going to read from the
artwork description because it's concise
and coherent crystalline work Arctic is
a software artwork in which a virtual
robot is cited upon a baron platform at
the Arctic North Pole using an ice
generation algorithm the robot performs
to create real-time Crystal patterns
titled archetypes and it produces 24
archetypes each solar day so that's 168
per week um over 8,000 over the entire
solar year archetypes include uh masks
solar crosses mandelas Stars trees
snowflakes and
melium the robot also changes color
second by second shifting across the
visible light spectrum in real time from
Solstice to Solstice so as a work of
realtime software um this piece launched
on the summer solstice and will perform
for one year and 23 times a day it
creates or sorry 24 times a day it
creates a new work that new work then
becomes available to be
collected and you can see that in a
short kind of a tight grouping that the
work um has uh similarity but as we kind
of go over week by week and month by
month you can begin to see some of the
range of the forms that are being
produced
so John's work I think is really unique
I think he is really moving forward into
new territory um he has always been
utilizing um code in this case
generative patterns um he works with his
team to develop very realistic uh
lighting textures and movement he
usually works with game engine software
and I think his work is interesting in
the way that it's it's not a game built
on game engines it's not Cinema but it
oftentimes feels very cinematic I think
it's really a hybrid of the two while
also being something completely
different as well I think he's really
he's moving into unique space with his
work so the next exhibition I want to
talk about is gray matter which uh
premiered or opened on ferof file in
November 2022 this was our first solo
show of virtual sculpture the way things
often work in ferof files an artist will
be a part of a group exhibition we'll
really enjoy working with them and then
we'll plan a Sol exhibition after so
arya's work was in the second ferof file
show the group exhibition um so this
exhibition featured eight virtual
sculptures and three physical metal
sculptures so this is an example of one
work in the show called ha
story so once again from the artwork
description recalling the display of
ancient Greco Roman sculptures the
pedestal and her story holds a head
fragment and Echoes the style of
nonfinito Aesthetics or ing digital
morphs of course in this case it's work
that's been done broken redone scanned
placed and finished the strange and
ambiguous protrusion of hair troubles
the usual relationship with the
archaeological artifact evoking a
dystopian atmosphere and uh it's really
important to Arya this idea of like what
is this sculpture made of like what is
the material one thing I'd really am
just really interested in her practice
is the way that she scans the world
digitally manipulates it does 3D prints
um operates on those 3D prints makes
changes red digitizes them and really
works back and
forth this is another work from the
exhibition called Mumble so this one
depicts a magical mesmerizing sculpture
intent on murmuring something
incomprehensible maybe a spell maybe a
prayer the movement of the lips is
continuous while the light effect
changes as the sculptures
flipped so Arya has you know been
working in this media for a really long
time worked in early web art uh worked
as a game developer of like really
interesting conceptual games for many
years and has been working in sculpture
and moved back into the Art Space the
last few years um and she's always been
like very adamant that her core medium
is 3D models it's working with virtual
sculpture so I don't think that we've
really found the right way to really
experience her work yet like right now
we're experiencing in this reduced way
but I really feel that she is um really
also charting new and interesting
territory with a lot of energy and a lot
of
passion okay the last work to talk about
today is crawl by Travis SMY this is our
current exhibition on ferof file it
opened in
July so I'll I'll again read from the
curator's note this one I wrote uh
welcome to the world of Travis SMY where
Mythic Greek labyrinths artificial life
algorithms and retro video games all
coexist so Travis and I talked about
this work for a year and for me that was
the process it was like meeting with
Travis every month and then every week
and like really working with him as the
work evolved um so this work is full of
references across history and Fields of
knowledge on the surface crawl feels
like it could be a part of the lineage
of video games that include Rogue net
hack Dungeon Crawl stone soup but
underneath the crunchy pixels and
vibrant colors there's a set of deep
references to artists like John F Simon
Jr Harold Cohen Terry Winters as well as
to natural and physical phenomena
including the way worms create silk
super organisms like ant inter terminite
societies and Cloud Chambers like Travis
is an artist who researches all the time
always researching always reading always
compiling visual information um and then
he he really puts all of that and
synthesizes it into his work um in
addition to the software work this piece
also featured eight um laser ET wood
blocks that you know he created and then
printed on
paper and so as a part of this work
Travis released 512 unique levels so the
series here was 512 from the single
piece of software um you never see them
in this form this sort of zoomed out
form the work is really meant to be seen
um in this format that we were looking
at a moment ago and I think for me a
ferof file is also a chance for artists
to try something new to like really push
their practices forward and what's new
here for Travis is working with this
Custom Image viewer this way of having
these you know digital works that he's
made and finding this way of navigating
it where it gets revealed which I think
also makes strong references to his
interest in longtime interested in
gaming in the way that we Traverse
Dungeons and mazes and those kinds of
role playing environments another thing
I think is interesting about this work
is the way that it's semi-automatic the
work plays itself but in any given
moment you can sort of take over control
and you can begin to navigate this maze
um on your own so it's work that works
uh well work that works in that way all
right we're at the end so looking at
this microcosm of work by John Arya and
Travis for me it it like opens up a lot
of potential space for software art and
I think there's so many other directions
these were the things that I was just
most excited to share with you today um
I've been really excited about this kind
of work for you know way over two
decades now I've been really lucky to
see it evolve um and ferof file right
now is a place that really promotes and
champions and hopes to um increase
interest and opportunities for artists
working with software um and also more
broadly digital media also a way for
artists to support their Studios like
and for to allow people to collect to
support those artists as a way of
patronage so thank you very much I
wanted to say I'm going to be around
like all day all day tomorrow I'd love
to talk with you about these things if
they're interesting to you and and other
things so thank
[Applause]
you all right thank you Casey uh for
sharing your work with us today um I was
curious uh today you were talking about
software but earlier in the week you had
also mentioned to me that video is
becoming a part of your practice and I
was wondering if you could tell us a
little bit about
that yes thanks
well I think it's really exciting as as
an artist you can sort of chart your own
course and so like over the years you
know I I worked almost only working with
Jenner dardo working with code for about
15 years but I've always been extremely
interested in cinema like I'm a movie
head and um I'd never found a way to
start making video and and so you know
at that time I then I took a few years
and really took a deep dive in that
direction um and for me that's opened a
lot of new ideas for ways of working
with software and so I know I'm an
advocate you know in a lot of the
teaching work that I do of like really
encouraging people to explore their
paths um I think that for me each medium
is a is a different way of think of
expressing my ideas um and like for
example the video that's sometimes
playing on the back wall here the uh
collaboration with Lauren Lee McCarthy
is like an example of a video work that
we've made that I think um before I took
that tangent into video work I wouldn't
really arrived at yeah great thank you
um I was also like thinking about your
work with feral file I was curious if
having uh online distribution channels
uh like FAL file and some others that
have um cropped up in the meantime have
kind of changed the way that you think
about uh creating your work knowing that
you might be Distributing it online
through uh one of these platforms and
what that means for you in your practice
that's a really good question Kate I
don't have a ready
[Music]
answer well I guess to answer in one way
there's there's this idea that I alluded
to in the in the presentation but I
didn't say out loud this idea of long
form generative art this idea that um
any output from a generative system is
equally valid and sort of exists as a
work I think that is a new idea that
like the last three or four years has
become really prevalent and um before
you know I had been working in a
generative way and always producing a
lot of work but I was always acted as an
editor acted as an eye um and I think
when you're working in that way you can
have a system that's sort of wild and
sometimes it'll produce something that's
just complete garbage to my own
sensibility and sometimes it'll produce
something that's really Exquisite and I
think the thing about long form
generative work is that you need to be
confident that it's always going to
produce something that will um that you
feel excited about and so in one way um
it is it constrains like what you're
doing um but it's also another different
kind of challenge so in like working
with generative art for a very long time
that was a challenge that I hadn't
really yet needed to think about and it
really I think encouraged my my work to
move in different
ways great thank you and one last
question can you are there any upcoming
shows at Fair feral file that you can
give us a little teaser for that you're
excited about yeah thanks for asking I I
decided not to plug feral file too hard
um maybe I did though um there's a show
in November opening with dendon veren
who's just an extraordinary uh Duo from
the Netherlands then there's a show
opening really soon in Tokyo that's
going to be a show of all generative art
um inspired by uh the Japanese
generative art uh Pioneer kaano and um
and uh I just saw the preview of the
work yesterday and it's looking really
exciting awesome thank you so much Casey
thanks
[Applause]